Concepts: data node (#385)
vegaprotocol/documentation: docs/concepts/vega-chain/data-nodes.md

## Database
The data node relies on PostgreSQL and IPFS. Postgres, an open source, relational database that supports relational and non-relational queries, is used to store and provide the data.

IPFS is used to share decentralised history segments across a data node's network.

:::note Go deeper
* [About PostgreSQL ↗](https://www.postgresql.org/about/): Read about PostgreSQL and explore the documentation.
* [About IPFS ↗](https://docs.ipfs.tech/concepts/what-is-ipfs/): Get familiar with IPFS.
:::

## Connect directly to database
It's possible to connect directly to the Postgres database of a data node without running a data node yourself, if the data node you're using allows it. You'll need the connection details from the data node operator, such as the relevant address, username and password in order to connect directly to that node's database.

Alternatively, you can run your own data node and use [decentralised history](#decentralised-history) to pull existing data into your new database, or start fresh.

:::caution Reliability
PostgreSQL database schemas are liable to change without warning and without deprecation.
:::

<!-- Link to the data node postgres information.-->

> ## Data retention

Author: @guoguojin Does anything in this section need to change based on https://github.com/vegaprotocol/vega/pull/7476?

Reviewer: Yes, you're missing a few data types:

trades_candle_1_day = 1 year
markets = 1 year
deposits = 1 year
withdrawals = 1 year
blocks = equal to the longest retention duration across all tables

The default retention period for lite = 1 day

Retention policy for any entity can be overridden by creating an entry in the config file under the SQLStore section:

```yaml
...
[SQLStore]
  [[SQLStore.RetentionPolicies]]
    HypertableOrCaggName = "balances"
    DataRetentionPeriod = "7 days"

  [[SQLStore.RetentionPolicies]]
    HypertableOrCaggName = "checkpoints"
    DataRetentionPeriod = "7 days"

...
```

Reviewer: Also, the retention policy for each entity is logged out when the node starts so they should be able to see what it is easily from there.

If they want to change the retention policy, a restart of the data-node is required.

**Standard data node retention times (default)** 

| Data type                 	| Default retention 	|
|---------------------------	|-------------------	|
| Balances (fine-grained)   	| 7 days            	|
| Balances (conflated)      	| 1 year            	|
| Network checkpoints       	| 7 days            	|
| Delegations                  	| 7 days            	|
| Ledger entries            	| 6 months            	|
| Orders                    	| 1 month            	|
| Trades                    	| 1 year            	|
| Trades 1 minute candle    	| 1 month           	|
| Trades 5 minute candle    	| 1 month           	|
| Trades 15 minute candle   	| 1 month           	|
| Trades 1 hour candle      	| 1 year            	|
| Trades 6 hour candle      	| 1 year            	|
| Market data               	| 7 days            	|
| Margin levels             	| 7 days            	|
| Margin levels (conflated) 	| 1 year            	|
| Positions                 	| 7 days            	|
| Conflated positions       	| 1 year            	|
| Liquidity provisions      	| 1 day             	|

> ## Decentralised history
> The daily addition of gigabites of core event data to the data node make it infeasible for a new data node to replay all blocks from the first block. Instead, new nodes can use a feature called decentralised history to recreate the history quickly and get into a state to be able to consume new blocks. 
> 
> History segments produced on every node for a given block span are identical, such that the IPFS content IDs of the segment are the same across all nodes. This means there's no need to upload data between nodes, as each node produces history segments, and thus can be a source of history segments. 
> 
> When a new node joins the network and requests a history segment for a given IPFS content ID, the provision of data to the node is shared across all other nodes in the network. The data node software also supports pulling all available historical data asynchronously once the newly joined data node has loaded the latest history segment. 
> 
> A decentralised history segment is created every snapshot interval. It gets the interval's worth of data from the PostgreSQL database to create the history segment, without blocking event processing. The data node then publishes it to the network's IPFS swarm, thus making it available to all other current and future data nodes (per network).
> 
> :::note Go deeper
> [Decentralised history readme](https://github.com/vegaprotocol/vega/blob/develop/datanode/dehistory/README.md): How to use decentralised history
> :::

Author: ```suggestion
## Network history
The daily addition of gigabites of core event data to the data node make it infeasible for a new data node to replay all blocks from the first block. Instead, new nodes can use a feature called network history to recreate the history quickly and get into a state to be able to consume new blocks. 

History segments produced on every node for a given block span are identical, such that the IPFS content IDs of the segment are the same across all nodes. This means there's no need to upload data between nodes, as each node produces history segments, and thus can be a source of history segments. 

When a new node joins the network and requests a history segment for a given IPFS content ID, the provision of data to the node is shared across all other nodes in the network. The data node software also supports pulling all available historical data asynchronously once the newly joined data node has loaded the latest history segment. 

A network history segment is created every snapshot interval. It gets the interval's worth of data from the PostgreSQL database to create the history segment, without blocking event processing. The data node then publishes it to the network's IPFS swarm, thus making it available to all other current and future data nodes (per network).

:::note Go deeper
[Network history readme](https://github.com/vegaprotocol/vega/blob/develop/datanode/networkhistory/README.md): How to use network history
:::
```

Data types are grouped into categories, and the retention time for each type can be changed in the data node's `config.toml` file. You can configure a data node so that all data older than any time period (e.g. `1m`, `1h`, `1h:22m:32s`, `1 month`) is deleted, or extend the default times for the retention mode you choose.

Some data can be saved in detail, and in a less-detailed sampling. Take balances, for example: In addition to saving every balance change, the `conflated balances` keep a sample of a balance from once every hour. This allows the data node to have data for a long period of time, but taking up less space than saving every balance change over a year.

The data node code's configuration includes a set of default retention time frames. Those time frames have been defined with an individual trader that wants to run their own data node, for their own use, in mind. A public data node that's intended to support querying archival information will need much longer data retention time frames.

Whenever a data node starts up, the existing retention policy for each data type is output in the logs.

### Data retention modes

> When starting a data node, you can choose one of three retention modes, depending on what you want the data node to do. 

Reviewer: This should be:

When initializing a data node.

When starting a data node, the chosen retention model will be applied. After initialization, it's possible to change the retention mode, for example from standard to archive, or lite by changing the retention period setting in the configuration file.
